"Are you crazy?"
"Mr. Francon, please listen to me." Roark’s words were like the steps of a man
walking a tightwire, slow, strained, groping for the only right spot, quivering
over an abyss, but precise. "I don’t blame you for the things you’re doing. I’m
Working for you, I’m taking your money, I have no right to express objections.
But this time...this time the client is asking for it. You’re risking nothing.
He wants it. Think of it, there’s a man, one man who sees and understands and
wants it and has the power to build it. Are you going to fight a client for the
first time in your life--and fight for what? To cheat him and to give him the
same old trash, when you have so many others asking for it, and one, only one,
who comes with a request like this?"
"Aren’t you forgetting yourself?" asked Francon, coldly. "What difference would
it make to you? Just let me do it my way and show it to him. Only show it to
him. He’s already turned down three sketches, what if he turns down a fourth?
But if he doesn’t...if he doesn’t..." Roark had never known how to entreat and
he was not doing it well; his voice was hard, toneless, revealing the effort, so
that the plea became an insult to the man who was making him plead. Keating
would have given a great deal to see Roark in that moment. But Francon could not
appreciate the triumph he was the first ever to achieve; he recognized only the
insult.
"Am I correct in gathering," Francon asked, "that you are criticizing me and
teaching me something about architecture?"
"I’m begging you," said Roark, closing his eyes. "If you weren’t a protégé of
Mr. Keating’s, I wouldn’t bother to discuss the matter with you any further. But
since you are quite obviously naive and inexperienced, I shall point out to you
that I am not in the habit of asking for the esthetic opinions of my draftsmen.
You will kindly take this photograph--and I do not wish any building as Cameron
might have designed it, I wish the scheme of this adapted to our site--and you
will follow my instructions as to the Classic treatment of the facade."
"I can’t do it," said Roark, very quietly. "What? Are you speaking to me? Are
you actually saying: ’Sorry, I can’t do it’?"
"I haven’t said ’sorry,’ Mr. Francon."
"What did you say?"
"That I can’t do it."
"Why?"
"You don’t want to know why. Don’t ask me to do any designing. I’ll do any other
kind of job you wish. But not that. And not to Cameron’s work."
"What do you mean, no designing? You expect to be an architect some day--or do
you?"
"Not like this."
"Oh...I see...So you can’t do it? You mean you won’t?"
"If you prefer."
"Listen, you impertinent fool, this is incredible!" Roark got up. "May I go, Mr.
79
Francon?"
"In all my life," roared Francon, "in all my experience, I’ve never seen
anything like it! Are you here to tell me what you’ll do and what you won’t do?
Are you here to give me lessons and criticize my taste and pass judgment?"
"I’m not criticizing anything," said Roark quietly. "I’m not passing judgment.
There are some things that I can’t do. Let it go at that. May I leave now?"
"You may leave this room and this firm now and from now on! You may go straight
to the devil! Go and find yourself another employer! Try and find him! Go get
your check and get out!"
"Yes, Mr. Francon."
That evening Roark walked to the basement speak-easy where he could always find
Mike after the day’s work. Mike was now employed on the construction of a
factory by the same contractor who was awarded most of Francon’s biggest jobs.
Mike had expected to see Roark on an inspection visit to the factory that
afternoon, and greeted him angrily:
"What’s the matter, Red? Lying down on the job?"
When he heard the news, Mike sat still and looked like a bulldog baring its
teeth. Then he swore savagely.
"The bastards," he gulped between stronger names, "the bastards..."
"Keep still, Mike."
"Well...what now, Red?"
"Someone else of the same kind, until the same thing happens again."
#
When Keating returned from Washington he went straight up to Francon’s office.
He had not stopped in the drafting room and had heard no news. Francon greeted
him expansively:
"Boy, it’s great to see you back! What’ll you have? A whisky-and-soda or a
little brandy?"
"No, thanks. Just give me a cigarette."
"Here....Boy, you look fine! Better than ever. How do you do it, you lucky
bastard? I have so many things to tell you! How did it go down in Washington?
Everything all right?" And before Keating could answer, Francon rushed on:
"Something dreadful’s happened to me. Most disappointing. Do you remember Lili
Landau? I thought I was all set with her, but last time I saw her, did I get the
cold shoulder! Do you know who’s got her? You’ll be surprised. Gail Wynand, no
less! The girl’s flying high. You should see her pictures and her legs all over
his newspapers. Will it help her show or won’t it! What can I offer against
that? And do you know what he’s done? Remember how she always said that nobody
could give her what she wanted most--her childhood home, the dear little
Austrian village where she was born? Well, Wynand bought it, long ago, the whole
damn village, and had it shipped here--every bit of it!--and had it assembled
again down on the Hudson, and there it stands now, cobbles, church, apple trees,
pigsties and all! Then he springs it on Lili, two weeks ago. Wouldn’t you just
know it? If the King of Babylon could get hanging gardens for his homesick lady,
80
why not Gail Wynand? Lili’s all smiles and gratitude--but the poor girl was
really miserable. She’d have much preferred a mink coat. She never wanted the
damn village. And Wynand knew it, too. But there it stands, on the Hudson. Last
week, he gave a party for her, right there, in that village--a costume party,
with Mr. Wynand dressed as Cesare Borgia--wouldn’t he, though?--and what a
party!--if you can believe what you hear, but you know how it is, you can never
prove anything on Wynand. Then what does he do the next day but pose up there
himself with little schoolchildren who’d never seen an Austrian village--the
philanthropist!--and plasters the photos all over his papers with plenty of sob
stuff about educational values, and gets mush notes from women’s clubs! I’d like
to know what he’ll do with the village when he gets rid of Lili! He will, you
know, they never last long with him. Do you think I’ll have a chance with her
then?"
"Sure," said Keating. "Sure, you will. How’s everything here in the office?"
"Oh, fine. Same as usual. Lucius had a cold and drank up all of my best Bas
Armagnac. It’s bad for his heart, and a hundred dollars a case!...Besides,
Lucius got himself caught in a nasty little mess. It’s that phobia of his, his
damn porcelain. Seems he went and bought a teapot from a fence. He knew it was
stolen goods, too. Took me quite a bit of bother to save us from a
scandal....Oh, by the way, I fired that friend of yours, what’s his
name?--Roark."
"Oh," said Keating, and let a moment pass, then asked:
"Why?"
"The insolent bastard! Where did you ever pick him up?"
"What happened?"
"I thought I’d be nice to him, give him a real break. I asked him to make a
sketch for the Farrell Building--you know, the one Brent finally managed to
design and we got Farrell to accept, you know, the simplified Doric--and your
friend just up and refused to do it. It seems he has ideals or something. So I
showed him the gate....What’s the matter? What are you smiling at?"
"Nothing. I can just see it."
"Now don’t you ask me to take him back!"
"No, of course not."
For several days, Keating thought that he should call on Roark. He did not know
what he would say, but felt dimly that he should say something. He kept
postponing it. He was gaining assurance in his work. He felt that he did not
need Roark, after all. The days went by, and he did not call on Roark, and he
felt relief in being free to forget him.
Beyond the windows of his room Roark saw the roofs, the water tanks, the
chimneys, the cars speeding far below. There was a threat in the silence of his
room, in the empty days, in his hands hanging idly by his sides. And he felt
another threat rising from the city below, as if each window, each strip of
pavement, had set itself closed grimly, in wordless resistance. It did not
disturb him. He had known and accepted it long ago.
He made a list of the architects whose work he resented least, in the order of
their lesser evil, and he set out upon the search for a job, coldly,
81
systematically, without anger or hope. He never knew whether these days hurt
him; he knew only that it was a thing which had to be done.
The architects he saw differed from one another. Some looked at him across the
desk, kindly and vaguely, and their manner seemed to say that it was touching,
his ambition to be an architect, touching and laudable and strange and
attractively sad as all the delusions of youth. Some smiled at him with thin,
drawn lips and seemed to enjoy his presence in the room, because it made them
conscious of their own accomplishment. Some spoke coldly, as if his ambition
were a personal insult. Some were brusque, and the sharpness of their voices
seemed to say that they needed good draftsmen, they always needed good
draftsmen, but this qualification could not possibly apply to him, and would he
please refrain from being rude enough to force them to express it more plainly.
It was not malice. It was not a judgment passed upon his merit. They did not
think he was worthless. They simply did not care to find out whether he was
good. Sometimes, he was asked to show his sketches; he extended them across a
desk, feeling a contraction of shame in the muscles of his hand; it was like
having the clothes torn off his body, and the shame was not, that his body was
exposed, but that it was exposed to indifferent eyes. Once in a while he made a
trip to New Jersey, to see Cameron. They sat together on the porch of a house on
a hill, Cameron in a wheel chair, his hands on an old blanket spread over his
knees. "How is it, Howard? Pretty hard?"
"No."
"Want me to give you a letter to one of the bastards?"
"No."
Then Cameron would not speak of it any more, he did not want to speak of it, he
did not want the thought of Roark rejected by their city to become real. When
Roark came to him, Cameron spoke of architecture with the simple confidence of a
private possession. They sat together, looking at he city in the distance, on
the edge of the sky, beyond the river. The sky was growing dark and luminous as
blue-green glass; the buildings looked like clouds condensed on the glass,
gray-blue clouds frozen for an instant in straight angles and vertical shafts,
with the sunset caught in the spires....
As the summer months passed, as his list was exhausted and he returned again to
the places that had refused him once, Roark found that a few things were known
about him and he heard the same words--spoken bluntly or timidly or angrily or
apologetically--"You were kicked out of Stanton. You were kicked out of
Francon’s office." All the different voices saying it had one note in common: a
note of relief in the certainty that the decision had been made for them.
He sat on the window sill, in the evening, smoking, his hand spread on the pane,
the city under his fingers, the glass cold against his skin.
In September, he read an article entitled "Make Way For Tomorrow" by Gordon L.
Prescott, A.G.A. in the Architectural Tribune. The article stated that the
tragedy of the profession was the hardships placed in the way of its talented
beginners; that great gifts had been lost in the struggle, unnoticed; that
architecture was perishing from a lack of new blood and new thought, a lack of
originality, vision and courage; that the author of the article made it his aim
to search for promising beginners, to encourage them, develop them and give them
the chance they deserved. Roark had never heard of Gordon L. Prescott, but there
was a tone of honest conviction in the article. He allowed himself to start for
Prescott’s office with the first hint of hope.
82
The reception room of Gordon L. Prescott’s office was done in gray, black and
scarlet; it was correct, restrained and daring all at once. A young and very
pretty secretary informed Roark that one could not see Mr. Prescott without an
appointment, but that she would be very glad to make an appointment for next
Wednesday at two-fifteen. On Wednesday at two-fifteen, the secretary smiled at
Roark and asked him please to be seated for just a moment. At four forty-five he
was admitted into Gordon L. Prescott’s office. Gordon L. Prescott wore a brown
checkered tweed jacket and a white turtle-neck sweater of angora wool. He was
tall, athletic and thirty-five, but his face combined a crisp air of
sophisticated wisdom with the soft skin, the button nose, the small, puffed
mouth of a college hero. His face was sun-scorched, his blond hair clipped
short, in a military Prussian haircut. He was frankly masculine, frankly
unconcerned about elegance and frankly conscious of the effect.
He listened to Roark silently, and his eyes were like a stop watch registering
each separate second consumed by each separate word of Roark’s. He let the first
sentence go by; on the second he interrupted to say curtly: "Let me see your
drawings," as if to make it clear that anything Roark might say was quite well
known to him already.
He held the drawings in his bronzed hands. Before he looked down at them, he
said: "Ah, yes, so many young men come to me for advice, so many." He glanced at
the first sketch, but raised his head before he had seen it. "Of course, it’s
the combination of the practical and the transcendental that is so hard for
beginners to grasp." He slipped the sketch to the bottom of the pile.
"Architecture is primarily a utilitarian conception, and the problem is to
elevate the principle of pragmatism into the realm of esthetic abstraction. All
else is nonsense." He glanced at two sketches and slipped them to the bottom. "I
have no patience with visionaries who see a holy crusade in architecture for
architecture’s sake. The great dynamic principle is the common principle of the
human equation." He glanced at a sketch and slipped it under. "The public taste
and the public heart are the final criteria of the artist. The genius is the one
who knows how to express the general. The exception is to tap the
unexceptional." He
weighed the pile of sketches in his hand, noted that he had gone through half of
them and dropped them down on the desk.
"Ah, yes," he said, "your work. Very interesting. But not practical. Not mature.
Unfocused and undisciplined. Adolescent. Originality for originality’s sake. Not
at all in the spirit of the present day. If you want an idea of the sort of
thing for which there is a crying need--here--let me show you." He took a sketch
out of a drawer of the desk. "Here’s a young man who came to me totally
unrecommended, a beginner who had never worked before. When you can produce
stuff like this, you won’t find it necessary to look for a job. I saw this one
sketch of his and I took him on at once, started him at twenty-five a week, too.
There’s no question but that he is a potential genius." He extended the sketch
to Roark. The sketch represented a house in the shape of a grain silo incredibly
merged with the simplified, emaciated shadow of the Parthenon.
"That," said Gordon L. Prescott, "is originality, the new in the eternal. Try
toward something like this. I can’t really say that I predict a great deal for
your future. We must be frank, I wouldn’t want to give you illusions based on my
authority. You have a great deal to learn. I couldn’t venture a guess on what
talent you might possess or develop later. But with hard work,
perhaps...Architecture is a difficult profession, however, and the competition
is stiff, you know, very stiff...And now, if you’ll excuse me, my secretary has
an appointment waiting for me...."
#
83
Roark walked home late on an evening in October. It had been another of the many
days that stretched into months behind him, and he could not tell what had taken
place in the hours of that day, whom he had seen, what form the words of refusal
had taken. He concentrated fiercely on the few minutes at hand, when he was in
an office, forgetting everything else; he forgot these minutes when he left the
office; it had to be done, it had been done, it concerned him no longer. He was
free once more on his way home.
A long street stretched before him, its high banks, coming close together ahead,
so narrow that he felt as if he could spread his arms, seize the spires and push
them apart. He walked swiftly, the pavements as a springboard throwing his steps
forward.
He saw a lighted triangle of concrete suspended somewhere hundreds of feet above
the ground. He could not see what stood below, supporting it; he was free to
think of what he’d want to see there, what he would have made to be seen. Then
he thought suddenly that now, in this moment, according to the city, according
to everyone save that hard certainty within him, he would never build again,
never--before he had begun. He shrugged. Those things happening to him, in those
offices of strangers, were only a kind of sub-reality, unsubstantial incidents
in the path of a substance they could not reach or touch.
He turned into side streets leading to the East River. A lonely traffic light
hung far ahead, a spot of red in a bleak darkness. The old houses crouched low
to the ground, hunched under the weight of the sky. The street was empty and
hollow, echoing to his footsteps. He went on, his collar raised, his hands in
his pockets. His shadow rose from under his heels, when he passed a light, and
brushed a wall in a long black arc, like the sweep of a windshield wiper.
9.
JOHN ERIK SNYTE looked through Roark’s sketches, flipped three of them aside,
gathered the rest into an even pile, glanced again at the three, tossed them
down one after another on top of the pile, with three sharp thuds, and said:
"Remarkable. Radical, but remarkable. What are you doing tonight?"
"Why?" asked Roark, stupefied.
"Are you free? Mind starting in at once? Take your coat off, go to the drafting
room, borrow tools from somebody and do me up a sketch for a department store
we’re remodeling. Just a quick sketch, just a general idea, but I must have it
tomorrow. Mind staying late tonight? The heat’s on and I’ll have Joe send you up
some dinner. Want black coffee or Scotch or what? Just tell Joe. Can you stay?"
"Yes," said Roark, incredulously. "I can work all night."
"Fine! Splendid! that’s just what I’ve always needed--a Cameron man. I’ve got
every other kind. Oh, yes, what did they pay you at Francon’s?"
"Sixty-five."
"Well, I can’t splurge like Guy the Epicure. Fifty’s tops. Okay? Fine. Go right
in. I’ll have Billings explain about the store to you. I want something modern.
Understand? Modern, violent, crazy, to knock their eye out. Don’t restrain
yourself. Go the limit. Pull any stunt you can think of, the goofier the better.
84
Come on!"
John Erik Snyte shot to his feet, flung a door open into a huge drafting room,
flew in, skidded against a table, stopped, and said to a stout man with a grim
moon-face: "Billings--Roark. He’s our modernist. Give him the Benton store. Get
him some instruments. Leave him your keys and show him what to lock up tonight.
Start him as of this morning. Fifty. What time was my appointment with Dolson
Brothers? I’m late already. So long, I won’t be back tonight."
He skidded out, slamming the door. Billings evinced no surprise. He looked at
Roark as if Roark had always been there. He spoke impassively, in a weary drawl.
Within twenty minutes he left Roark at a drafting table with paper, pencils,
instruments, a set of plans and photographs of the department store, a set of
charts and a long list of instructions.
Roark looked at the clean white sheet before him, his fist closed tightly about
the thin stem of a pencil. He put the pencil down, and picked it up again, his
thumb running softly up and down the smooth shaft; he saw that the pencil was
trembling. He put it down quickly, and he felt anger at himself for the weakness
of allowing this job to mean so much to him, for the sudden knowledge of what
the months of idleness behind him had really meant. His fingertips were pressed
to the paper, as if the paper held them, as a surface charged with electricity
will hold the flesh of a man who has brushed against it, hold and hurt. He tore
his fingers off the paper. Then he went to work....
John Erik Snyte was fifty years old; he wore an expression of quizzical
amusement, shrewd and unwholesome, as if he shared with each man he contemplated
a lewd secret which he would not mention because it was so obvious to them both.
He was a prominent architect; his expression did not change when he spoke of
this fact. He considered Guy Francon an impractical idealist; he was not
restrained by an Classic dogma; he was much more skillful and liberal: he built
anything. He had no distaste for modern architecture and built cheerfully, when
a rare client asked for it, bare boxes with flat roofs, which he called
progressive; he built Roman mansions which he called fastidious; he built Gothic
churches which he called spiritual. He saw no difference among any of them. He
never became angry, except when somebody called him eclectic.
He had a system of his own. He employed five designers of various types and he
staged a contest among them on each commission he received. He chose the winning
design and improved it with bits of the four others. "Six minds," he said, "are
better than one."
When Roark saw the final drawing of the Benton Department Store, he understood
why Snyte had not been afraid to hire him. He recognized his own planes of
space, his windows, his system of circulation; he saw, added to it, Corinthian
capitals, Gothic vaulting, Colonial chandeliers and incredible moldings, vaguely
Moorish. The drawing was done in water-color, with miraculous delicacy, mounted
on cardboard, covered with a veil of tissue paper. The men in the drafting room
were not allowed to look at it, except from a safe distance; all hands had to be
washed, all cigarettes discarded. John Erik Snyte attached a great importance to
the proper appearance of a drawing for submission to clients, and kept a young
Chinese student of architecture employed solely upon the execution of these
masterpieces.
Roark knew what to expect of his job. He would never see his work erected, only
pieces of it, which he preferred not to see; but he would be free to design as
he wished and he would have the experience of solving actual problems. It was
less than he wanted and more than he could expect. He accepted it at that. He
met his fellow designers, the four other contestants, and learned that they were
85
unofficially nicknamed in the drafting room as "Classic,"
"Gothic,"
"Renaissance" and "Miscellaneous." He winced a little when he was addressed as
"Hey, Modernistic."
#
The strike of the building-trades unions infuriated Guy Francon. The strike had
started against the contractors who were erecting the Noyes-Belmont Hotel, and
had spread to all the new structures of the city. It had been mentioned in the
press that the architects of the Noyes-Belmont were the firm of Francon & Heyer.
Most of the press helped the fight along, urging the contractors not to
surrender. The loudest attacks against the strikers came from the powerful
papers of the great Wynand chain.
"We have always stood," said the Wynand editorials, "for the rights of the
common man against the yellow sharks of privilege, but we cannot give our
support to the destruction of law and order." It had never been discovered
whether the Wynand papers led the public or the public led the Wynand papers; it
was known only that the two kept remarkably in step. It was not known to anyone,
however, save to Guy Francon and a very few others, that Gail Wynand owned the
corporation which owned the corporation which owned the Noyes-Belmont Hotel.
This added greatly to Francon’s discomfort. Gail Wynand’s real-estate operations
were rumored to be vaster than his journalistic empire. It was the first chance
Francon had ever had at a Wynand commission and he grasped it avidly, thinking
of the possibilities which it could open. He and Keating had put their best
efforts into designing the most ornate of all Rococo palaces for future patrons
who could pay twenty-five dollars per day per room and who were fond of plaster
flowers, marble cupids and open elevator cages of bronze lace. The strike had
shattered the future possibilities; Francon could not be blamed for it, but one
could never tell whom Gail Wynand would blame and for what reason. The
unpredictable, unaccountable shifts of Wynand’s favor were famous, and it was
well known that few architects he employed once were ever employed by him again.
Francon’s sullen mood led him to the unprecedented breach of snapping over
nothing in particular at the one person who had always been immune from
it--Peter Keating. Keating shrugged, and turned his back to him in silent
insolence. Then Keating wandered aimlessly through the halls, snarling at young
draftsmen without provocation. He bumped into Lucius N. Heyer in a doorway and
snapped: "Look where you’re going!" Heyer stared after him, bewildered,
blinking.
There was little to do in the office, nothing to say and everyone to avoid.
Keating left early and walked home through a cold December twilight.
At home, he cursed aloud the thick smell of paint from the overheated radiators.
He cursed the chill, when his mother opened a window. He could find no reason
for his restlessness, unless it was the sudden inactivity that left him alone.
He could not bear to be left alone.
He snatched up the telephone receiver and called Catherine Halsey. The sound of
her clear voice was like a hand pressed soothingly against his hot forehead. He
said: "Oh, nothing important, dear, I just wondered if you’d be home tonight. I
thought I’d drop in after dinner."
"Of course, Peter. I’ll be home."